PX4 Release procedure (#2331)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/releases/README.md

# Releases

## Release Notes

> List of the changes that went into each release, explaining the included features, bug fixes, deprecations and updates in detail.

Author: Done

* [v1.13](../releases/1.13.md)
* [v1.12](../releases/1.12.md)

The full archive of releases for the PX4 autopilot project can be found on [GitHub](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases)

## Release Versioning

PX4 uses a Semantic versioning (`Major.minor.patch[-beta#]`) system ([Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_versioning)).

- Change in `Major`: Breaking changes
- Change in `minor`: New non-breaking changes

> - Change in `patch`: All other non-breaking changes

Reviewer: I challenge this. 

Yes, the version looks like semantic versioning but given we have never bumped the major version in 8 years, we're not really following this. Semantic versioning makes sense when you have a clear API or contract but it's not so easy to define that for PX4. Is it the uORB message definitions? Is it the make interface? Is it the fact that it runs on an STM32 and can be flashed with QGC?

For instance, from v1.13 to v1.14 we're presumably removing the mixers. To me that's a very clear major change and so would definitely warrant a major version bump.

To call it semantic versioning we have to define and agree what we call the API, then based on that we could choose the version number.

Reviewer 2: I agree. The removal of mixer API was absolutely massive for developers. The change to replace RTPS with XRCE-DDS is similarly impactful for developers. 

But I am not sure how else to describe our logic. Perhaps make it clear - we have reserved "major" for some future potential break, and "minor releases" are the significant ones. Or we actually work out what would be "major"

Reviewer 3: > For instance, from v1.13 to v1.14 we're presumably removing the mixers. To me that's a very clear major change and so would definitely warrant a major version bump.

I'm in favour of starting to bump the major version number if we're comfortable doing so going forward (trying much harder to respect some level of semantic versioning) and conveying that intent. From some perspectives removing mixers is a big change, but also keep in mind the vast majority of users are simple multicopters where it's really not much different.

Reviewer: > From some perspectives removing mixers is a big change, but also keep in mind the vast majority of users are simple multicopters where it's really not much different.

Right, so we need to decide what our interface/contract is. Is it a user flashing PX4 in QGC and flying a quad, or is it a developer building on top of it.

Reviewer 2: IMO a note for this release is a good approach for now. The reality is that `minor` bumps are actually `major` releases and we have no plan for bumping the `major` number. 

In future it would be good if we agreed criteria and used semver properly. I think the contract for iterating the version should be both users and developers.

Author: I added a note on the fact that we will decide during maintainers meeting whether the release will entail major or minor version bump

## Release Schedule

PX4 follows the following release schedule:

<!-- TO BE DEFINED -->

- `Major` releases: By consensus among Maintainers & Community
- `minor` releases: Roughly every 6 months
- `patch` releases: When critical bug-fix / hardware support is needed

> - `beta` releases: Every 1 week during beta testing phase

Reviewer: I would word it that we do a major or minor release every 6 months. The choice whether it's a major or minor release should be based on whether we change the contract/interface (major) or just add and enhance stuff internally (minor).

Author: Done!

> ### Past Major/Minor releases
> 
> There has been roughly 14 minor release in the past, with roughly 6 months ~ 1 year between new minor version releases. And there hasn't been any new major version releases yet.
> 
> - [v1.13.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.13.0): June 22nd, 2022
> - [v1.12.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.12.0): July 11th, 2021
> - [v1.11.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.11.0): September 7th, 2020
> - [v1.10.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.10.0): December 17th, 2019
> - [v1.9.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.9.0): May 25, 2019
> - [v1.8.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.8.0): June 19th, 2018
> - [v1.7.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.7.0): December 15th, 2017
> - [v1.6.2](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.6.2): June 7th, 2017
> - [v1.5.1](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.5.1): December 7th, 2016
> - [v1.4.1](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.4.1): August 6th, 2016
> - [v1.3.1](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.3.1): May 22nd, 2016
> - [v1.2.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.2.0): February 21st, 2016
> - [v1.1.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.1.0): December 24th, 2015
> - [v1.0.0](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/releases/tag/v1.0.0): August 23rd, 2015

Reviewer 2: What value is this? I'd remove it. The info is on github releases.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: Agreed

## Release Procedure

> ### Point release (Major/Minor change)

Reviewer 2: Everywhere do first-letter capitalisation. It is doc-set wide. If you want to change it just for one doc. Don't.

```suggestion
### Point Release (Major/Minor Change)
```

> Point releases are the ones where the major/minor version tag changes. It comes with major new features, hardware supports as well as refactors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Point releases are the ones where the major/minor version tag changes.
They come with major new features, new hardware support, and general improvements.
```

Author: Applied

> #### Initial branch out deadline

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Initial Branch-out
```

> For the initial beta release of a new major/minor change, a "branch out deadline" gets set during the Maintainers Call.

Reviewer 2: State what a branch out is. I assume it is a release branch off main? If so, state that.

Author: Done!

The procedure is:

1. Agreement on branch out deadline: By consensus during Maintainers call
2. Publication in social media & mailing list about the branch out deadline: By [Ramon](https://github.com/mrpollo)
3. Project board with the name for the new release gets created: By [Daniel](https://github.com/dagar)

>    1. The board must include a `patch version` field (selectable)

Author: Shall we keep the version controlling of the Project board as a free form (up to maintainers)?

I put it here although we didn't discuss this because I think we do need a clear beta version controlling method to avoid confusion, and this is one way I want to suggest how to do it. Do you have other suggestions?

> 4. Until the branch out date

Author: Thanks for the clarification!

Regarding the 'branch out date': This is the thing we discussed as the 'deadline for when the release branch gets branched out, where it gets separated from `main`.

Do you think this initial "warning" to people of an upcoming branching out is unnecessary? I thought in the call we discussed that alerting people of a branching out process will incentivize them to finish the PR to get it to the next release :thinking:

   1. All the PR/Issues that a contributor wants to finish before the deadline gets added to the Project Board: By Maintainers & during Maintainers call
   2. All the release blocking Issues / PRs gets added to the Project Board by each Maintainer

On the branch out date, the `release/Major.minor` branch gets branched out and a `Major.minor.0-beta1` gets released for testing.

#### Beta testing

Before the new major/minor release, the beta version gets released for a testing phase. During the beta testing phase following changes are **allowed**:

- Critical bug fixes
- New hardware supports

And following changes are **not allowed**:

- Big new features
- Refactors (with no functional changes)

During the beta testing, the procedure is:

1. During the Maintainers call
   1. Remaining issues for the next beta release gets discussed, and maintains make an effort to resolve all issues before the next beta release
   2. Discussion on certain PRs that may be worth to be included in the next beta gets discussed, and gets added to Project Board appropriately

> 2. Test reports from users get collected as a Github Issue / Discord message / Flight Review log / Discuss forum post

Author: Good point. I just wanted to give a hint on the upcoming test reporting system procedure (test matrix thing that we need to discuss), but for now this is definitely an unnecessary detail!

   1. If it is valid issue, the maintainer in charge of the sector creates / adds an Issue to keep track of it in the Project tracker and assign the next beta version to it's `patch version` field.

#### Maintainers Agreement before the release

> After numerous beta testings & before the official new major/minor release, PX4 Maintainers need to reach a consensus that the new version is release-able from each of their perspectives. This means (for each maintainer):

Reviewer 2: Who is doing the testing?

Author: Applied!

> - The [core functionalities](core_components.md) they maintain has been tested, and has no major issues are found

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The [core functionality](core_components.md) that they maintain has been tested, and has no major issues
```

Author: Done!

> - All the outstanding issues/PRs with `patch version` as the last beta version are resolved

Author: But shouldn't we keep the project board alive so that we can control the patch releases?

#### Point release execution

> After the consensus from the Maintainers, the point release gets made:

Reviewer 2: "Maintainers" is not a proper noun. It should be lower case everywhere.
```suggestion
After the consensus from the maintainers, the point release gets made:
```

Author: Done

1. The `patch version` of the last beta release (e.g. `M.m.0-beta9`) gets renamed to include the release name (e.g. `M.m.0/M.m.0-beta9`)
2. New tag for the last beta release commit gets tagged (as `M.m.0`) by [Daniel](https://github.com/dagar)
3. Release notes are prepared in Github side collaboratively by Maintainers

> 4. Public new point release announcement gets made via Social media / Mailing list by [Ramon](https://github.com/mrpollo)

Author: I think that in any way the stakeholder should be mentioned in the doc :thinking: 

What I think we could do instead of mentioning individual directly, is we could assign a role of a 'Release maintainer', as referenced by https://github.com/PX4/PX4-user_guide/pull/2313, to be the stakeholder who is in charge of this process.

Or, do you think we don't need to assign the task to anyone? I fear that the responsibilities would be scattered & it would be unclear who is the one working on each pieces of the release procedure
